## Annotations

- feature that enables you to embed supplemental information into a source file.
- A.K.A metadata, designed mostly for use by development and deployment tools.
- it is created through a mechanism based on the interface.


```java

@interface MyAnnotation{
    String str();
    int value();
}
```

- the `@` preceding the keyword interface tells the compiler an annotation type is being declared.
- Annotation consists solely of method declarations. but you will not be providing with the method bodies.
- methods declared inside annotations cannot have parameters.
- java implements the methods. Moreover, the methods act like fields.
- it cannot include an `extends` clause. however, all annotation types automatically extends the `Annotation` interface.


```java

@MyAnno(str="hello",value=44)
public static void method(){}

```

- The string "hello" is assigned to the str member of MyAnno.
- when an annotation member is given a value, only its name is used. hence, annotation members look like fields here.


### Annotation Retention Policy
- A retention policy determines at what point an annotation is discarded.
- java defines three such policy which are encapsulated within the `java.lang.annotation.RetentionPolicy` enumeration.
- They are : `SOURCE` ,  `CLASS`(default),  `RUNTIME`
- `SOURCE` : An annotation with this retention policy is retained only in the source fie and is discarded during compilation.
- `CLASS` : An annotation with this retention policy is stored in the `.class` file during compilation. however it is not available through JVM during runtime.
- `RUNTIME` : An annotation with this retention policy is stored in the `.class` file during compilation and is available through JVM during runtime.
- Runtime offers the greatest annotation persistence.
- An annotation on a local variable declaration is not retained in the `.class` file.

```java
import java.lang.annotation.Retention;
import java.lang.annotation.RetentionPolicy;

@Retention(RetentionPolicy.RUNTIME)
@interface MyAnnotation {
    String str();
    int value();
}
```

### Restrictions
- annotation cannot inherit another annotation.
- methods declared cannot have any parameters.
- methods cannot specify a throws clause.
- methods must return one of the following:
  - A primitive type:  int, double, etc
  - An object of type String or Class
  - An object of an enum type
  - An object of another annotation type
  - An array of a legal type.
- annotations cannot be generic.