### Functional Programming

#### Benefits
- Programs are declarative
- Functions have referential transparency - multiple calls to the same method with same args are guaranteed to return the same result.
- Functions do not change the state of the enclosing objects.
- Functions are thread safe
- Easier to test, no side effects
- Functions facilitate parallelism

#### Functional Programming in JAVA Using Functional Interface

- It is an interface with single abstract method.
- Functor is the implementation of functional interface.
- Closure is the block of code, body of the Functor that gives you access to an outer scope from an inner function.


```java

@FunctionalInterface
interface Functional<T>{
    boolean equal(T s);
}

class Main {

    public static void main(String[] args){
        // fn = functor
        Functional<String> fn = new Functional<String>(){ // Anonymous Inner class
            @Override
            public boolean equal(String s){
                // closure
                return s.equals(st);
            }
        };
    }
    
}

```

#### Free Variables.
- Refers to the variables used in a function that are neither local variables nor parameters of that function.
- a.k.a non-local variables

- In Java Free variables refer to the variables used in lambda expression or method reference that are neither local variables nor method parameters. These variables are considered free because they are not bound to a specific invocation of the lambda expression or method reference.
- According to the java specification, a free variable can only be a variable that is effectively final.

- In the below example the Functor captures the `st` variable from the loop and compares with the `string` variable. The `st` variable is effectively final because its scope is limited to a single iteration of loop.
    and is a `free variable`.

```java

class Main{
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        List<String> strings = new ArrayList<>();
        strings.add("Hello");
        strings.add("there");
        strings.add("welcome");

        List<Functional<String>> predicates = new ArrayList<>();

        for (String st : strings) {
            // using lambda expressions to realize functional interface
            Functional<String> fn = string -> {
                return string.equals(st);
            };
            predicates.add(fn);
        }

        for(Functional<String> predicate: predicates){
            System.out.println(predicate.equal("Hello"));
        }
    }
}
```

> Note: Java's restriction on captured variables ( free variables ) being effectively final differs from languages like JavaScript, which allows mutable closures.
> However, Java's approach provides better predictability and thread-safety, making it suitable for concurrent applications.

