## 07. Data Types ( Primitive )


### Eight Primitive Data types:

- Integers ( byte, short, int, long )
- Floating point  ( double, float )
- Characters  ( char )
- Boolean ( boolean )

> `4 bit = 1 Nibble, 8 bit = 2 Nibble = 1 Byte`
>

| Type | Storage (byte) | Range ( Inclusive ) | specifier | Default value |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| byte | 1  | -2^7 to 2^7 – 1 (-128 to 127) |  | 0 |
| short  | 2 | -2^15 to 2^15-1 (-32768 to 32767) |  | 0 |
| int | 4 | -2^31 to 2^31 -1 (– 2,147,483,648  to 2,147,483,647 ) |  | 0 |
| long | 8 | -2^63 to 2^63-1 (-9,223,372,036,854,775,808 to 9,223,372,036,854,775,807) | L or l  | 0 |
| float | 4 | 1.40239846 x 10^-45 to 3.40282347 x 10^38 
Real numbers up to 7 decimal digits. | f or F | 0.0f |
| double  | 8 | 4.9406564584124654 x 10^-324 to 1.7976931348623157 x 10^308
Real numbers up to 15 decimal digits. | d or D | 0.0 |
| char | 2 (16 bits) | ‘\u0000’ (0) to ‘\uffff’ (65535) |  | \u000 (0) |
| boolean |  | true , false |  | false |

1. byte `byte b;`
2. short `short s;`

> The `byte` and `short` types are automatically promoted to  `int` type when the expressions are evaluated.
>

1. int `int a;`
2. long `long t;`
    - to specify long literals, explicitly tell the compiler that the literal value is of type long by appending an upper or lower case L.

3. float `float temp;`
    - it is useful when you need a fractional component, but do not require a large degree of precision. for example, float can be useful when representing dollars and cents.

   > we should always end the float type value with **f or F**, otherwise, the compiler considers it as a double value. E.x: `float myFloat = 256.8f ;`
>

1. double `double pi;`
    - it is useful when you need to maintain accuracy over many iterative calculations, or are manipulating large valued numbers.

> Floating point numbers (floats and doubles) are represented internally in Java in binary. The result is that many (base-10) decimals are not precisely represented as a
float or double.
>
>
> For this reason, it is never safe to test whether two floating point numbers are equal.
>

1. Characters `char code;`
    - Java uses [unicode](https://home.unicode.org/) to store characters. Unicode defines fully international character set that can represent all of the characters found in all human languages. Unicode requires 16 bits thus `char` is a `16-bit` type.

2. Boolean `boolean isSet;`