## 09. variables and Literals

## Variables

- It is a **named memory location** that holds the data value of a particular data type.

    ```java
    Declaration: 
    					dataType variableName; 
    
    Initialization: 
    					dataType variableName = value; 
    											**OR**
    					dataType variableName; 
    					variableName = value; 
    ```


### Variable Naming rules:

- cannot contain white spaces
- can begin with a special character dollar **($)** and underscore **( _ )**
- first letter of a variable cannot be a digit
- camelCase convention should be used
- Built in keywords ( int, for, while, class, break, continue, etc ) cannot be used

### Types of variables:

- Local:
    - declared within a body of method, constructor or code block.
    - scope is limited within that block.
    - created within the method or block and destroyed after the method invocation.
    - No initialization ( no default values ), if not initialized compile time error
    - stored in stack
- Instance
    - declared inside the class but outside any method, constructor or block body
    - not shared between objects.
    - scope is tied to the instance or object of the class.
    - created with the new keyword and destroyed when the object is destroyed.
    - default values are given if not initialized
    - stored in heap
- Static ( Class Variable )
    - declared inside a class but not inside the method, constructor or a block, with the static keyword
    - shared with all instances of class.
    - scope is tied to the class itself.
    - created at the start of the program and destroyed at the end of the program.
    - default values are given if not initialized
    - stored in **Method Area or Class Area**


## Literals

- The data items that have fixed or constant values.

```java
int number = 20;
int -> data type
number -> variable 
20 -> literal
```

Types:

1. Integer literals

2. Floating literals

3. Boolean literals

4. Character literals

5. String literals

6. Null literal