## 16.  Data Types ( Reference )

### Non-primitive or reference type:

- cannot store the value of a variable directly in memory.
- stores a reference or address (memory location) of value.
- Strings, Arrays, Objects, Classes, Interfaces

| Type | Storage (byte) | Range ( Inclusive ) | specifier | Default value |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Reference types |  |  |  | null |

### Strings:

- The String data type is used to store a sequence or array of characters (text). But in Java, a string is an **object** that represents an array or sequence of characters.
- The *java.lang.String* is the class is used for creating a string object.
- String literals should be enclosed within double-quotes. The difference between a character array and a string is that in the string a special character ‘\0’ is present
- `String <String_variable_name> = “<sequence_of_strings>"`

Two ways of creating string:

- using string literal `String myString = “Hello World”`
- using new keyword `String myLine = **new** String(“Hello World!!!”);`

### Arrays:

- An Array in Java is a single object which can store multiple values of the same data type.
- Arrays are homogeneous data structures that store one or more values of a specific data type and provide indexes to access them.
- A particular element in an array can be accessed by its index.

Two steps in creating arrays:

- Array Declaration: `data-type array_name [ ];` or `data-type[ ] array_name;`
- Array Initialization: `array_name = **new** data-type [size **of** array];` or

  `array_name = **new** data-type[] {comma seperated values};`


Example:

```java
// Declaration
int daysInMonth[];
char[] lettersInSentence;

// Initialization
daysInMonth = new int[100];
lettersInSentence = new char[] {'b','c','d','e'};

// declaration and initialization in same lie
int[] arr = {1,2,3,4,5};
int[] arr1 = new int[]{1,2,3,4,5,6};

// Two dimensional array
double[][] a = new double[m][n];

System.out.println(daysInMonth.length); // array length

// array copying
int[] primes = { 7, 11, 5, 2, 3};
int[] primesCopy = Arrays.copyOf(primes, primes.length);

int[] luckyNums = {350, 400, 150, 200, 250};
System.arraycopy(primes, 1, luckyNums, 3, 2); // [350, 400, 150, 11, 5]
```

***Multidimensional arrays**:* The same notation extends to arrays that have any number of dimensions. For instance, we can declare and initialize a three-dimensional array with the code

```java
double[][][] a = new double[n][n][n];
```

***Ragged arrays**:*  There is no requirement that all rows in a two-dimensional array have the same length—an array with rows of nonuniform length is known as a *ragged array*. The possibility of ragged arrays creates the need for more care in crafting array-processing code.

```java
int[][] arr = new int[3][];

arr[0] = new int[2];
arr[1] = new int[3];
arr[2] = new int[5];
```